Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Alexander Thomas. He's a
senior lecturer in media production and film at the
University of East London, and today we're talking about
his book, The Politics and Ethics of Transhumanism, Techno-human
evolution and Advanced Capitalism. So Doctor Farmers, welcome to
the show. It's a big pleasure to
everyone. Thanks very much for the invite, Ricardo. It's
a pleasure to be here. Thank you.
So let's start perhaps with a bit of, with
a bit of background here also for the people
who are listening and watching us who are not
familiar with the topic of transhumanism. So what is
transhumanism, and I know that it is very associated
with different kinds of technology. So what kinds of
technology go associated with it?
Um, OK, yeah, sure. So, um, transhumanism is, is
basically the idea of, of self-directed human evolution. Um,
SO it's the claim that we can and that
we should, uh, radically enhance the human condition through
the use of, of applied technoscience, essentially. And, and
most transhumanists think that we're on the cusp of
making this a reality reasonably soon. So, uh, one
way of thinking about it is that if the
history of scientific and, and technological progress, um, can
be seen as an attempt to use nature to
better serve human needs, transhumanism can be seen as
the revision of human nature to better serve our
fantasies. Um, AND, you know, as you pointed out
there. There are a bunch of technologies that that
they think will make this so, and, and that
is the reason why after, you know, 300,000 years
or so of, of our existence, they think maybe
we're suddenly about to become something else. And it's
um it's what they sometimes refer to as the
converging NIC suite of technologies that make this thinkable.
And NIC stands for nanotechnology, biotechnology, information technology, and,
and cognitive science. So nanotech is technology on a
very small scale, um, even on the scale of
individual atoms and molecules. uh, SO they, they have
a concept called um atomically precise manufacturing. Um, SO
that's part of the transhumanist kind of nano nanotechnological
dream that might allow us to turn smoke into
strawberries and cancer tissues into healthy tissues and create
radical abundance. Um, THEN there's biotechnology, which includes things
like genetic engineering. Um, AND obviously information technology, which
we're all very familiar with, computers, the digital world,
developments in AI, the potential of quantum computing, and,
uh, obviously cognitive science is the study of the
mind. But in particular, it's the fusion of these
technologies which really for transhumanists offer profound possibilities. So
an example might be brain to computer interfaces. Such
as those designed by Elon Musk's company, Euroink, and
that contains, you know, biotech elements, infotech elements, cognotech,
all within one system. So, so on the one
hand, transhumanism is a kind of ideological commitment to
being proactionary in, in using and utilizing these technologies
to apply them to humanity and to evolve humanity
into a kind of enhanced entity, and then continue
with that process. Um, BUT on the other hand,
it is sometimes, it's sometimes also used descriptively. So
as a term for this process, the, the kind
of material unfolding, the co-evolution of humans and technology.
So, um, but personally, when, when I use the
term, um, I, I tend to describe the process
using terms such as technogenesis or techno-human evolution, and
um I use transhumanism for the, the ideology saying
yes, this is a good idea.
And how all these transhumanism, because just looking at
the ideas associated with it and particularly the kinds
of technologies that go associated with it, we, one
would think that perhaps it's just a very recent
thing that came about over the last few decades
or something like that, but maybe feel particularly from
a philosophical standpoint, it might be a bit older.
Yeah,
absolutely. I mean, I, I would say humans have
probably been dreaming about kind of transhumanist possibilities for
pretty much as long as human culture has existed,
I'd say. Um, YOU know, we, we, I'm sure
throughout history, humans have been very aware of the
limitations of, of what it is to be human,
uh, you know, we die, we get disease, our
bodies are frail, um, and I'm sure we've always
kind of wanted to imagine these things away. Um,
BUT obviously in the, in the modern sense of
the word, transhumanism is, is much more recent. Um,
NOW transhumanists often point to kind of the Enlightenment
as the philosophical lineage of their thinking. So, um,
you know, we had Enlightenment philosophers such as Francis
Bacon. He imagined science leading to incredible possibilities. And
then, you know, a bit later in the, in
the 19th century, uh, there was a thinker called
Wynwood Read, for example, and he, you know, wrote
about most of the ideas that modern transhumanists talk
about now. Um, THERE was also biologists in the,
in the 20th century, the early 20th century, like,
um, Haldane and Bernal, who, who provided very strong
kind of proto-transhumanist visions. Um, BUT modern transhumanism is
usually said to. Begin with Julian Huxley, um, and
he's an evolutionary biologist and, and a eugenicist, and,
and the brother of Aldous Huxley, uh, who wrote
The Brave New World, obviously. Um, HE, he's the
one who coined the term transhumanism in its modern
sense, and that was in the early 1950s. But
there is another kind of argument which says actually
it's even more recent than that. Um, SO there's
a guy called Max Moore, and he claims to
have coined the term independently and around the 1980s
and 1990s there was a a kind of transhumanist
movement called the Extropian movement, and that was very
influential, and there was a kind of extropian mailing
list that included many of the, the very famous
transhumanists that have emerged since then. Um, SO, you
know, that you could argue that the Extroian movement
has, has been very important in terms of conceptualizing
the modern meaning and movement of transhumanism. So maybe
transhumanism starts in the 80s and 90s with kind
of Maxim more and extropianism. So those are the
kind of, um, you know, depends how you define
it, is how far you go back.
And what are some of the most prominent figures
associated with transhumanism today?
Um, WELL, today, I, I mean, yeah, there's, there's
lots. I mean, as, as I say, you could,
if you think historically, you've got Francis Bacon, obviously.
Um, SO, uh, I think actually Max Moore argued
that transhumanists should forget the Christian calendar and start
a new one where year zero is the year
that Bacon uh published Noum or Ganum. So he
thinks he's that important in terms of, in terms
of transhumanism. Uh, SO, uh, so, um, yeah, um.
Uh, SO yeah, so you could argue, bacon is
very influential. There's a, there's a Russian philosophical called
Nikolai Fedorov, who was the father of Russian cosmism,
which is a kind of proto-transhumanist offshoot again, um,
in the, you know, kind of 19th century. Wynwood
Reid, who I've mentioned. His book The Masdom of
Man in 1872 kind of imagined all the current
ideas of transhumanism such as space colonization, new human
bodies, um, humanity functioning as a hive mind, uh,
the invention of immortality he talked about, and, and
the belief that humans would one day run rule
the universe essentially as a kind of godlike posthuman
entity. So all of that was imagined in 1872.
Um, JBS Haldane and and JD Bernal, um, they,
they kind of wrote very important, uh, proto-transhumanist ideas.
Uh, Julian Huxley in 1951 it was that he
potentially coined the term transhumanism in the modern sense
in his article, Knowledge, Morality and Destiny. Um, I
would also say FM 2030 is very important. He
influenced Max Moore and Natasha Vieter Moore, who kind
of were key figures in this Exopian movement. FM
2030 was a guy called FM Esfandiari, and he
changed his name to FM 2030 because he thought
in the year 2030, he was going to be
100 and life would be completely changed and radically
improved. Uh, SADLY he died in 2000 and was
cryonically frozen. Um, I also think Ray Kurzfell is,
is a very important and influential thinker, um, uh,
on the transhumanist movement, a particular type of transhumanism
that we might talk about later, which you could
call singularitarianism. Um, IN terms of modern thinkers, I
would then add, Nick Bostrom, I would say is
probably the most influential transhumanist thinker of the 21st
century, I would say. Um, AND other notable people
that I haven't really mentioned so far, David Pearce,
who co-founded the World Transhumanist Association, which later became
Humanity Plus, um, Anders Sandberg, who was kind of
Nick Bostrom's sidekick at the Future of Humanity Institute,
which was an important transhumanist kind of academic institute.
And James Hughes, who's, um, the main kind of
uh figure on, on, uh, the left leaning side
of transhumanism, so-called techno-progressivism, he's quite an important guy.
Um, BUT the truth is today. I would say
the most important transhumanist thinkers are really the billionaire
elites of Silicon Valley. Um, I'm not sure we
could call them thinkers exactly, they're more like robber
barons than philosophers maybe. Um, BUT you know, the,
the, um, Peter Thiel, Elon Musk, Sam Altman, Mark
Andreessen, the, the, and, and, you know, other tech
billionaires as well, they have been extremely forthright in
their transhumanist aims and ideas. Um, THEY'RE absolutely transhumanist
ideologues and, um, they're also heavily invested obviously in
doing. What they can to extend their wealth and
power, including creating techno authoritarian political formations, and they
use transhumanism, I think, as a kind of justification
to themselves, mainly for these extreme extremist political positions,
um, because it kind of tells them they can
be the architects of some grand utopian future. So,
um, so yeah, that's a kind of, you know,
the, the, the both the. They're kind of more
established transhumanist intellectual figures, but also the, the most
important ones in terms of um real world impact
and and the ones that are really taking, taking
transhumanism seriously today.
And what are the main tenets of transhumanism or
the main values associated with it?
Well, I think one thing to point out here
is there's a lot of disagreement and a lot
of variety of transhuman transhumanisms if you like, um,
they don't necessarily see the same techno human evolution,
what that should look like, what it will look
like, etc. Um, HOWEVER, there are a few things
we could point to. There's a, there's a line
in the Transhumanist Reader, which is edited by Max
Moore and Natasha Vitemore, uh, where they claim that
transhumanism should be inclusive, pluralistic, and lead to the
continuous questioning of knowledge. And, uh, for my book,
I use that as a kind of jumping off
point, because I, I kind of, what I tried
to do was argue, well, those values are not
going to be realized if transhumanism is developed in
the context of advanced capitalism, which we, we can
talk about later maybe. Um, SO, so those are
values that I don't think are realizable for transhumanism
in a capitalist context. Um, BUT, you know, you
could also say that those aren't really foundational tenets
or values. They aren't something that all transhumanists would
ascribe to. Um, CERTAINLY these kind of new techno
authoritarian formations would be strongly opposed to all of
those principles, in truth, um. But another three kind
of popular ideas amongst transhumanisms, which you could see
as kind of values or or kind of, you
know, um, tenets I guess. Um, AND those would
be the proactionary principle, a morphological. Freedom and existential
risk. So the proactionary principle is a kind of
counter stance to the precautionary principle. Um, THE precautionary
principle argues that we should be cau cautious not
to cause harm when undertaking, you know, scientific practice.
Um, BUT the proactionary principle argues, well, no, we
should count the cost of not undertaking kind of
risky measures, as well as the focus on potential
harm. So that's the proactionary principle. The morphological freedom
that emphasizes the right of each individual to have
a free choice as to whether to adopt or
reject kind of human enhancement possibilities. But in doing
that, it kind of characterizes each human as having
equal agency, uh, kind of almost by default, and
effectively it fails, therefore to consider questions of power,
social context, and so on. And Max Moore, who
I mentioned, he, he was the progenitor, I think,
of both of those ideas. But the concept of
existential risk was really developed primarily by Nick Bostrom,
and this was a kind of response to transhumanists
realizing that the very technologies they wanted to develop
may not create this kind of utopian future that
they dreamed of, but rather it could bring about
the destruction of humanity. So existential risk was a
way of applying reason, uh, in a kind of
a with a kind of uh I guess an
academic gravitas, if you like, to say, don't worry,
we're in control of this. Uh, WE shouldn't just
give up on the development of dangerous technologies, we
can manage the risk technocratically. AND and kind of
employer a quantifying attitude to risk and and think
about things in a very measured way. So those
three ideas of of pro-actionary principle, morphological freedom and
existential risk are very much uh central to transhumanism
today, I would say most transhumanist discourse today.
And are there also at least some common goals
across the different types of transhumanism out there?
Um, AGAIN, I would say there's not necessarily a
complete consensus, in truth, um, but, uh, one way
transhumanists sometimes frame their goals is, is to talk
about the three supers. So there's super longevity, uh,
so transhumanists would like us to have radically expanded
lifespans, potentially even to live forever, some of them,
or at least until we choose to stop dying
ourselves. Some of them are also focused there on
a health span, so increasing the human health span
rather than the lifespan per se. Um, THEN there's
super intelligence, so that's the aim of vastly increasing
the cognitive capacities of the human race, or potentially
the post-human race, which might be a different thing.
We can, we can maybe get into that. Um,
AND super wellbeing, so they would like us to
improve on what it feels like to be human,
you know, they talk about us being better than
well. Perhaps we could, uh, radiate pure joy. Or
we could have also maybe more choice and freedom
about what our physical bodies are like and what
they enable us to do. So why shouldn't we,
we be able to, I don't know, echolocate like
a bat or be stronger than a bear or
fly like a bird or run faster than a
cheetah, you know, so these kind of things as
well, so, uh, that would come under there as
well. Um, BUT, you know, I would also again
point out that given the emphasis on morphological freedom,
some, some transhumanists would even reject these three supers
and would rather say, well, it's up to each
person to decide what enhancement is for them. So
some transhumanists would say that.
So you mentioned that there are different kinds of
transhumanism, of course, we're also going to get into
more detail about some of them, particularly when later
on in our conversation, we talk about task realism
and things like that. But what would you say
are at least the main kinds of transhumanism?
Um, YEAH, I mean, there's, there is a lot
of subcategories, increasing numbers of splinter groups and, and
lots of kind of transhumanist adjacent ideas as well.
So, you know, you could kind of name almost,
there's just loads of them, proliferating all the time.
Um, BUT there are certainly different political positions within
transhumanism, so there's a kind of more inclusive left
leaning version of transhumanism, which is usually called techno-rogressivism,
which is largely associated with James Hughes, who I've
mentioned. Um, ON the right, there's, uh, there's a
more, there's the, the extropian movement, which I also
mentioned, for example, that tends to be much more
techno libertarian. So that's more of a kind of
right wing um transhumanist philosophy. There are also religious
and spiritualist kind of transhumanist groups. There's a Christian
Transhumanist Association, a Mormon Transhumanist Association, there are Buddhist
transhumanists, um, and there are also, you know, designations,
some of which you pointed to there, things like
singularitarianism, cosmism, long-termism. I'm sure we'll speak about some
of these later on. Yes. And also now there's
kind of newer related philosophies I would say, so
we'll talk about those I'm sure later, but things
like effective accelerationism, neo-reaction, these have, um, you know,
a lot of transhumanist kind of influence in there
as well, and they can be seen as kind
of subcategories of transhumanism as well, potentially.
Mhm. So, just a minute ago when I asked
you about the goals of transhumanism, you mentioned the
word improvement, and I guess that attached to it
lots of times goes the word uh enhancement. So
what does enhancement mean in the context of transhumanism?
Yeah, it's a very good question and, and bizarrely,
I don't think it's completely clear that that's the
truth. So again, transhumanists don't necessarily agree on, on
this. Um, SO some emphasize again morphological freedom, which
means enhancement is a question of individual choice. Whereas
others kind of think, well, objectively, there are, we
can point to certain things and say that's an
enhancement, so they, you know, it might be better
to be able to move quicker or to be
stronger or to be healthy for longer or to
be more intelligent, they would say, well, that's just
objectively better. So that, that, that kind of this,
this kind of um almost contradiction between this objective
assumption uh assumption and this kind of um individual
choice is is a contradiction that most transhumanists don't
even acknowledge in truth, but I I think it's
definitely there. Um, AND I think, you know, maybe
an even more important question is not just what
does enhancement mean to transhumanists, but what does enhancement
mean in the context of the social world we
live in, you know, which is again what my
book was exploring, this, this question of capitalism. So,
so that's the question again that transhumanists don't tend
to answer. They, they've they kind of neglect to
think about that we live in an actual context,
you know, they imagine. There's uh completely imaginary futures
that are divorced from the reality of our, of
our times. Um, SO absolutely, it's true that context
shapes our conception of what we want, what we
need, um, who we are, and so. Uh, YOU
know, much of what we'd like to enhance is
about really our competitive relationships with each other, for
example, our, our ability to compete in the marketplace.
So, of course, you know, here, um, the capitalist
context means we're unlikely to be able to afford
all the same level of enhancements, um, and, and
the implications of that could be quite extreme. The
more you can afford, the more you can enhance,
the more you can enhance, the more you can
afford. It's, it's, so it's kind of true already
that we have, you know, social mobility has always
been extremely limited for that very reason. But transhumanism
I think could social stagnation and the class differences
we already see. So I think transhumanists need to
spend much more time thinking about what should enhancement
mean if they are really committed to, you know,
these values we mentioned earlier of inclusivity, plurality, and
how we might restructure society in ways that ensure
that that does become the reality, because I, I
don't think it will in, in the context of
capitalism. So, so yeah, that's a big challenge for
transhumanists, I would say.
And transhumanism, transhumanist suggest different kinds of enhancement as
you mentioned there, there's, for example, physical enhancement or
biological enhancement, psychological enhancement of different kinds of traits.
And very interestingly, they also talk about moral enhancement.
So what is that exactly?
Yeah, um, that's again a a a very good
question. So, um, interestingly, I would say there's a,
a guy called Julian Savulescu, and he's probably the,
the thinker that's most strongly related to this kind
of claim or or idea of moral enhancement. Um,
I don't think he actually identifies as a transhumanist,
but to all intents and purposes, he, he really
is one. I can't, I can't see quite how
he's different, but um. He, he argues that, yeah,
we need to upgrade the moral nature of the
human species in order to survive. So he says
we're facing, um, he calls it a Bermuda triangle
of extinction. So the three things that threaten catastrophe
are radical technological power, liberal democracy and human moral
nature. So he argues, well, there's nothing we can
do about radical technological development, it's coming. Um, SO,
you know, it's the other two we need to
kind of mess with for him. So, you know,
liberal humanism might have to give way to a
surveillance society for him and human moral nature. Should,
well, we should maybe reprogram ourselves to kind of
more desirable ends, um. So essentially Savulescu believes our
moral natures are kind of now at odds with
this modern socio-technical world that we've developed, this globalized
world where we're all interconnected. So he, he points
to our empathy and says it is limited and
out of step with the global reach. We now
have. He points out that we're short-termist in our
thinking and we tend to only cooperate in smaller
groups when, you know, we're being watched, essentially, um,
and, you know, maybe that's why we can't fix
climate change for him. Uh, HE points out that
we tend to be distrustful of strangers and that
we're naturally xenophobic. But the truth is all of
these ideas are actually highly debatable and clearly socially
dependent. Many of us aren't really xenophobic and um
some people are highly empathetic and prosocial, and some
societies develop these tendencies much more than others. So
again, capitalism with its focus on individual self-interest, um,
it's insistence that life is a competitive struggle of
all against all, that kind of produces these shortcomings
that Savulescu is is saying are essential to human
nature. Um, SO, so, you know, he therefore wants
us, he thinks that you can't fix it with
social changes, it has to be rewriting our, our
code effectively, rewriting our biology, um. Yeah, so, so
Savulescu claims that these enhancements, um, you know, actually
should be imposed potentially against people's will as well,
if necessary, he thinks. So again, that obviously contravenes
this principle of morphological freedom, but but as I
say, none of these values are really held by
all transhumanists. There's a, you know, a bit of
play with all of them. So, um, yeah, Savulescu,
what he doesn't seem to recognize, I think, is
that moral perspectives differ incommensurably. We can't make them
all agree. So he, he kind of almost makes
an assumption that what is moral and what therefore
what constitutes moral enhancement can be somehow universally agreed.
Uh, WITH reason, rationality, um, but in reality there
is no transcendent kind of view from nowhere, um,
that can, you know, justify this, this authoritarian position.
He, he kind of creates this imaginary thing he
calls a god machine which could arbitrate with perfect
fairness, but of course it doesn't exist. So this,
this typifies, I think, um, a misguided transhumanism presumption
that technological progress can actually solve moral problems. It
it can't. Values can only be situated from a,
from a particular perspective, and in the context of
new technologies, of course, they would likely be enacted
through a filter of, of kind of powerful vested
interests. So again, Savulescu misses this influence of power
in determining moral norms. Um, SO his naive hope
of kind of fixing moral nature, I think, points
to this really important flaw in transhumanist thought, essentially,
you know, technological progress does not guarantee moral or
ethical progress. Two world wars of the 20th century
tell us that, and all the ensuing conflicts since
and the ongoing climate catastrophe, you know, facts can
only tell us. So much they can direct our
means, but they can't in in themselves effectively determine
moral ends. So Savulescu's idea that morality is a,
is a kind of a potential site for, for,
um, instrumental reason, I think, you know, something we
can just fix, is symptomatic of this failing in
so much transhumanist thought that. The simplistic idea that
instrumental technical progress can fix or solve moral problems
and so yeah, I think that's uh it's it's
worth, you know, thinking through that because it's, it's
something that just recurs again and again in transhumanist
thought, that error.
So there are two questions here that I think
are very important for us to address, uh, particularly
after we talked about enhancement, because I think it
can bring them to mind is or does transhumanism
imply hierarchy in any way?
Um, YEAH, I mean, given that the notion of
enhancement is really at the center of transhumanism, it's
difficult to suggest that doesn't kind of have an
assumption that comes along with it of one thing
being better than another, which of course then implies
hierarchy. Um, AGAIN, savvy transhumanists will deny it by
pointing to morphological freedom, that's always their get out
clause. Um, BUT to me that that's kind of,
it's totally unconvincing because without taking the further step
of recognizing that we live in a given social
context, which may also dictate a hierarchical structure, um,
transhumanists are simply kind of, you know, using that
morphological freedom as a piece of rhetoric to avoid
the real challenge. So. You know, could we create
a form of transhumanism that was genuinely inclusive, non-hierarchical,
pluralistic, I don't know. I think that's the great
challenge, but it certainly demands a kind of ethical
rethinking of our social structures, as well as, you
know, as well as those kind of technological developments
that transhumanism vision. So I think if you focus
just on the latter without the former, you're actually
likely to radicalize the hierarchical structures and the potential
for. You know, unjust, inhumane and, and potentially catastrophic
outcomes. So, so yeah, I do think transhumanism has
a tendency towards hierarchy, absolutely implicit within it.
OK. And the second question then is, is transhumanism
an elitist movement?
Yeah, I mean, um, again, you know, similar I
would say there are transhumanists who would characterize their
politics and aims as, as definitely anti-elitist. Um, AND
in fact, I think, you know, if I'm honest,
most of them would espouse some kind of inclusive
anti-elitist values. Um, BUT the problem is how transhumanism
will actually manifest itself in the real world. How
do we ensure, you know, that there is no
hint of elitism in the real world process, um,
the kind of. The techno human evolution is taking,
that's taking place at the moment is absolutely, it's
reminiscent of the colonialist, exploitative, highly elitist, racist, patriarchal
structures of the past. So for me, I, I
don't know, I, I think any, any kind of
respectable form of transhumanism would actually begin with that
problem. That should be the starting point. So you
know, rather than super longevity and the singularity and
radical abundance and all of that, the real ethical
challenges of rethinking society in an equitable and just
way, in the face of the development of these
radically potent technologies, I think should be the starting
point of a, of a kind of ethically responsible
transhumanism.
So, ideologically speaking, what would you say are perhaps
some of the most prominent arguments against transhumanism coming
from people like, for example, the bioconservatives and others
that oppose transhumanism.
Yeah, well, I mean, that's a, a good question
and, and absolutely, you know, you mentioned the bioconservatives
there and, and that has been their, their vision
has been one of the most stringent critiques of
transhumanism and also perhaps the most famous critique of
transhumanism. Um, ESSENTIALLY what they say is that they,
they kind of wish to advocate for the integrity
of modern humanity. So they, they criticize transhumanism on
the grounds that it is in some way unnatural
or in some way insults the integrity or dignity
of the current human race. But that really depends
on a kind of essentializing of some particular facet
of the human. And I think therefore it's actually
quite a weak critique because we've always developed alongside
our technologies. We're, we're always changing and becoming something
new. Life is processed. So I think clinging on
to some imaginary essentialist quality of the human is
is quite a misguided way to criticize transhumanism, to
be honest. Um, SO that is the most famous
critique, but I don't think it's the best. I
think instead, much more effective critiques are coming to
the fore now, and they're ones that, you know,
really kind of focus on ethical questions around power,
ecology, complexity, pluralism and inclusiveness, ideas I've mentioned. And
when we think in, in these terms, we can
see how transhumanism could become highly discriminatory, uh, it
could radically increase inequality, it could lead to the
development of technologies that threaten the existence, especially of
vulnerable and disenfranchised people. So, um, so I think
those kind of critiques that think through power and
justice are much more effective, uh, when directed at
the, at, you know, at transhumanism as a critique.
So earlier on, you mentioned the a tie or
a potential tie between transhumanism and capitalism particularly and
more specifically advanced capitalism. So in what ways does
transhumanism tied to capitalism, are there specific ideas, principles
of capitalism that get manifested in transhumanism?
Yeah, I think, um, I think definitely, I think
it's worth, you know, kind of going through a
few of the logics of capitalism and thinking about
how transhumanism mirrors these logics, or how the implications
of transhumanism could worsen the dangers that are inherent
within capitalism. So, um, you know, I, I'll, I'll
just list 6 things now and kind of explain
the relationship, if you like, between transhumanism and capitalism
in these ways. So the first is that, you
know, capitalism is, as we all know, it's dependent
on growth. So without growth, the system stalls and
falls into crisis. And this growth fetish kind of
motivates the drive to constantly bring as much of
life as possible into the kind of um the
auspices, the, the, the, the tentacles of capitalism if
you like. um. So it is always for that
reason, consuming new frontiers. And of course the possibility
of endless growth on a finite planet is dependent
on a notion of perpetual progress, cos otherwise it
just doesn't make sense. And of course progress, growth
and conquering new frontiers. Uh, WHETHER it's outward into
space or inward into the secret codes of human
beings, those things are integral to transhumanism too. So
transhumanism kind of helps to, to, to justify or,
or, uh, you know, enable this myth of, of
perpetual growth on which uh capitalism depends. Um, SECONDLY,
capitalism isn't just an economic system. SO that growth
for progress and, and, uh, that, that, that, that
kind of, um, desire for, for growth and progress
means capitalism kind of, it, it cannibalizes non-economic zones.
Um, SO it's, it's, for example, dependent on a
history of colonial looting. Um, AND of course there
are constant ongoing privatizations and enclosures of public forms
of wealth. Um, IT also consumes nature and con
conceptualizes the, the kind of, um, uh, the resources
of nature as limitless and and free for the
taking, so it sees nature as both a sink
and a tap. And transhumanist in a, in a
kind of capitalist context repeats this relationship, but explicitly
for the human body too, which is then broken
up, turned into data objectified. So bodies are needed
for experimentation, data analysis. And just as bodies that
are deemed surplus to the requirements of capital capitalism
tend to be excluded or marginalized or incarcerated or
often even killed, this might also become true of
bodies surplus to transhumanist progress as well. Um, SO
thirdly, capitalism conceptualizes humans as free, rational, autonomous individuals
where each of us is, is responsible for our
own position in the market, and we're at liberty
to choose what to buy and when. And transhumanism
absolutely echoes this, this kind of vision with, with
its concept of morphological freedom, which which we've discussed
already a lot. So the claim that each of
us is at liberty to pursue our own version
of enhancement. We're essentially all entrepreneurs of the self,
as Foucault might put it. So, um, this, this
responsibility for our position in the market also means
that all humans are in competition with all other
humans. So that's the fourth point. Our fundamental being
is defined by the logics of competition rather than,
say, collaboration. So it's rivalry and contestation, not solidarity
and care. So this closes the possibility for transhumanism
to become inclusive and pluralistic, and it also becomes
rivalrous and subject to the demands of of capitalist
progress which we might talk about. Um, 5th, for
anything to be capitalizable, it needs a calculable value,
uh, an exchange value. So effectively everything exists in
a new empirical reality with an imagined price tag.
So, um, you know, incomparable things are incorporated into
the to a kind of system of equivalents. Uh,
EVERYTHING becomes an object that way as well. And
this is also true of people who are objectified
both by the role they play in the system,
but also their very being is an object for
exploitation by capital. So again, our data, our genes,
our desires, all are abstracted into products for profit
making. And this objectification of the human is absolutely
integral to uh to transhumanism as well, you know,
it it it's, it needs it for, for transhumanist
progress to exist. Um, FINALLY, I would say that
capitalism is in a way, it's ethically indifferent. It
doesn't promote an innate conceptualization of human flourishing. It
just asks, is there a buyer, is there a
seller, what's the price? That that's it's kind of
ultimate position. So it projects and generalizes instrumental reason,
uh, by which I mean the how of things,
and not ethical reason, which, which might help us
ask why, um, beyond simply the profit motive. Um,
SO as we've seen with our analysis of Savulescu.
Um, THIS is also a transhumanist trait, the belief
instrumental progress can solve the question of moral progress.
So it doesn't neither asks deeper questions about human
flourishing, really. They just both assume a kind of
individualized, progress based, growth-based model of enhancement. So, um.
So yeah, I mean, I don't know if you
want me to talk a little bit more about
advanced capitalism specifically or or.
Yes, I was going to ask you now about
that. What is advanced capitalism? What does that mean
exactly?
Yeah,
so, so I use the term advanced capitalism in
the, in the title of my book and, and
really what I'm pointing out to there is the
fact that capitalism has been around for some time.
So it has advanced its logics of development have
developed. So it, it is a process itself. It's
not um something that's set in stone and forever
the same. It's always moving and and changing essentially.
And, um, for the last 45 years or or
around about, we've had a particularly toxic form of
capitalism called neoliberalism. Um, AND, you know, that's a
term that many people don't know what it means.
Most transhumanists have no idea what it means. Um,
AND it's interesting as well that at the moment,
this, this kind of version of capitalism may actually
be dying, and it might even be getting replaced
by something much worse, uh, whether it's a kind
of techno feudalism or tech authoritarianism, we will see,
and maybe we can speak about those terms a
little bit. Later as well. Um, BUT there are
a few more logics, I would say I'll, I'll
probably go just through two, just for the sake
of time, um, which, uh, where these things tend
to be true of capitalism generally, but they're made
much more extreme by this version of of capitalism,
this neoliberal version. So, um, the first is, is
huge increases in inequality. So, you know, maybe the
most significant trend that has kind of taken place
during this most recent incarnation of, of global capitalism
is a growth in inequality within developed Western countries
and between the wealthiest 1% and the rest globally.
So. These dynamics kind of completely undermine the idea
that a process such as the development of transhumanist
technologies, um, will be an inclusive process. We see
in modern capitalism incredible concentrations of wealth and at
the same time exclusions and expulsions of those who
are not productive to the kind of wheels of
capital. So. Um, YOU know, think about what happens
at the moment to the marginalized, for example, the
number of migrants who are allowed to die at
sea every year. Um, AND if improvements in AI
lead to significant automation unemployment, you could have vast
swathes of society becoming the marginalized and the excluded.
And at the same time, a small group of
billionaires who own these technologies may have an almost
total concentration of wealth with access to the most
powerfully transformative technologies in world history. Alongside this kind
of redundant mass of people. So that's, uh, you
know, one potential danger. Um, THE other aspect of
neoliberalism that's worth a quick mention here is the
notion of financialization. So finance is, is pivotal in
the increasingly kind of pervasive, complex, decentralized, um, and
global character of capitalism. So if wages stagnate, the
economy itself needs financialization because if if workers don't
have the means to purchase consumer goods, the economy
would collapse. So debt has become so pervasive, it
has pretty much defined this, this kind of era
of economic history. And and transhumanist narratives are actually
extremely useful for a debt-based system because debt relies
on the idea of speculation and future returns. So
as climate crisis deepens, um, and political instability becomes
more entrenched, the promise of a bright tomorrow looks
more and more fanciful, but transhumanism, uh, you know,
and the related technologies that it depends on, it
promises a kind of unbelievable return on investment. So
the AI bubble we're seeing right now is a
great example. The AI industry is constantly saying, oh,
AGI is just around the corner, super intelligence is
on its way. AI will solve all problems. These
claims kind of draw investment. And despite currently disappointing
returns on that investment and the limited use of
of current AI technologies now, it is these stories
of radical progress around the corner which keep that
debt bubble buoyant. So transhumanist stories are absolutely key
to this kind of debt-based model of neoliberal capitalism.
So let me ask you now about long-termism. What
is it and how does it relate to transhumanism?
Um, YEAH, so, so long-termism is, is essentially a
fusion, uh, between a movement called effective altruism, or
EA and and transhumanism. So basically, effective altruism was
trying to rationally determine uh what was the most
effective forms of, of doing good, essentially. So how
do we do altruism well? Again, I would say
it's a fairly, it's fairly misguided from the start,
in my opinion, because it it doesn't understand that
ethics and values are situated and perspectivible and rather
assumes a kind of calculable, rationally determinal, uh almost
utilitarian logic. OK, so I think it's flawed from
its inception. But um the first iteration of, of
EA uh came up with bed nets, I think
that was what they said we needed, more bed
nets, um, because mosquitoes were the great killer. Um,
THEN it focused on the meat industrial complex, I
think, uh, uh, a huge amount of suffering of
animals. Um, IT, I kind of identified that as
the greatest source of suffering in the world. Um,
SO those were the two initial projects. But then
transhumanism interjected into this kind of rationalist, uh, analysis
of, of doing good. And the key transhumanist thinker
in long-termism is Nick Bostrom, who I said is,
is the most influential, uh, transhumanist bostrom of the
21st century, I think. And what Bostrom argues essentially
is that we are on the verge of making
posthuman digital consciousnesses that are at least equivalent to
human lives. Um, AND I think he has different
numbers in different articles, but one of them says
that, um, 10 to 29, so 10 with 290s
after it, potential human lives are wasted every second
that we are not colonizing the Virgo supercluster with
computer generated minds of human equivalents. So the number
of people on Earth right now is just 8.2
billion or so. And this number is so vastly
smaller than the potential what he called cos cosmic
endowment is the term he used. So what we
can build as as a human race, this kind
of post-digital empire that we can build amongst the
stars. So, so this, you know, put simply, the
the the. The comparison here is that these 8.2
billion people just don't matter. Their lives are what
he calls mere ripples, um, you know, so climate
crises, genocides, wars, all of them are minor episodes,
as long as some survive and are able to
pass on the baton of technological expertise to create
this cosmic endowment. And of course what that means
is that um you know, it's those who hold
that that uh that kind of the baton of
technological expertise are the people that matter. In other
words, it's the Silicon Valley billionaires and their big
tech companies. Um, THEY'RE much more valuable than the
rest of the 8.2 billion people who, who just
don't really matter in comparison. And so of course,
for that reason, long-termism has proved extremely appealing, unsurprisingly,
to the Silicon Valley elites, because it, it says
to them that they're the, the central protagonists in
the most important moment in human history, effectively. Um,
Toby Ord who I think co coined the term
long-termism, I think. Um, HE, he wrote a book
called The Precipice, so the idea that we're, we're
right on the edge of, of, you know, either
going, falling to existential risk and disappearing, or fulfilling
our cosmic endowment amongst the stars. And again, you
know, Elon Musk, he, he, um, there's a guy,
Will McCaskill is another long-termist thinker. He wrote a
book called What We Oe the Future, and Musk
um tweeted that it was a close match for
his own philosophy. And Musk also tweeted one of
Bostrom's articles saying it's likely the most important paper
ever written. So, so you can see the real
influence of long-termism on, on people like Elon Musk.
Emile P. Torres, who's done, he's written extensively on
this, and very effectively as well, and he calls
radical long-termism um the most influential ideology in the
world today that most people have never heard about,
and that's for, for that reason of its influence
on people like Elon Musk.
How about accelerationism and I know that uh some
prominent figures in the effective altruism movement have also
recently embraced accelerationism. So what is the link there
and also the link between accelerationism and capitalism and
transhumanism.
OK, yeah, that's, uh, that's a very good question,
bit of a complex one, but um. So essentially,
in, in capitalism, labor is both the source of
all value, so all profits are generated from the
exploitation of labor. And and yet labor is also
constantly squeezed out or replaced by automating technologies. So
that that is uh for accelerationism, that's the central
contradiction in capitalism. Um, AND so accelerationism is a,
is a philosophy which essentially tries to solve this
contradiction. Benjamin Noyes says it's, it's, um, it's by
alchemizing labor with the machine. That's what accelerationism is
trying to do. And it has, it has quite
a lot of different manifestations actually, and, and proponents
on both the left of the political spectrum and
the right. So, uh, Nick Sernerchek and Alex Williams,
who once wrote an accelerationist manifesto. They claim that
um Marx and Nick Land are the two kind
of paradigmatic uh accelerationist thinkers, so Marx obviously on
the left and and Nick Land on the right.
Um, SO the left version of this might see
technology as bringing about a kind of post-work utopia,
something like fully automated luxury communism, that's uh Aaron
Bustai wrote a book called that. So, so the
idea we'd no longer have to work, the machines
would do it all and all for us, and
we'd all live happily together in, in kind of,
uh, you know, abundance and luxury. So that that's
the kind of left wing version. The right sees
a kind of um what Nick Lam calls a
meat grinder future, where it's the pure pure kind
of um spinning wheels of capital frenzy, uh, that
creates a humanless future essentially. It's pure growth and
efficiency. So the human is just a kind of
detritus, it's a drag to this process, and it
could be made much purer without the messy human.
So in a sense, it's, it's not very transhumanist
at all because it's, it's not at all anthropocentric.
It doesn't put the human at the center of
things, it puts capital at the center of things.
So it's a, it's a very capital centric idea,
the right wing version. But for that very reason,
actually, this right wing version has proved very popular
with techno utopian libertarians. Uh, AND as I mentioned
earlier, extropianism, this kind of 1980s, 1990s original transhumanist
modern movement. That was exactly that. It was a
techno optimistic, libertarian movement. It was hugely influenced by
people like Ayn Rand and and Hayek, etc. So
there's this huge overlap between this transhumanist techno libertarianism
and this kind of accelerationist techno libertarianism, essentially. Um,
AND, and now, as you say, accelerationism is. Inspiring
new kind of tech inflected movements on the right,
uh, which are also very informed by transhumanism. The
most notable ones are effective accelerationism, or EAC for
short, and neo-reaction, um, of which actually Nick Land
is also one of the, the central thinkers along
with uh Curtis Yarvin, who's been, you know, noted
as a, as an important neo-reactionary thinker.
So it's interesting that you mentioned that in the
case of acceleration is, we can find accelerationist takes
on the left and the right with figures like
Marxx and Nick Land. So when it comes to
the political side of things, is transhumanism, not accelerationism
but transhumanism associated with any specific kind of political
poll or movement? I mean, can we see it
both on the left and the right or not?
Um, YEAH, yeah, so, um, I think I mentioned
that you've got techno-progressivism on the left and techno
libertarianism on the right, and they can be seen
as two holes within transhumanism. Um, THERE have also
been transhumanist political parties, OK, I think um there
was one transhumanist Italian politician who was elected, actually,
um, but I think, I think there was some
sort of scandal that made his, his political career
slightly short-lived. Famously, also, there's a, there's a guy
called Zoltanistan who was another very famous American transhumanist,
and he toured the US in a, in an
immortality bus, he called it, to campaign for the
2016 election, uh, very unsuccessfully, of course. Um. But
what transhumanists, I think, have essentially realized is, uh,
is, you know, kind of the democratic route to
political success is, is not for them. So, um,
transhumanists, however, at the same time have, have kind
of uh they've they've got more power than ever
before, and it's, it's like I say, it's not
through campaigning on a transhumanist agenda or being democratic.
Elected, it's, it's it's essentially by hijacking democracy. So
Elon Musk and Peter Thiel have been the architects
of this. Thiel is JD Vance's benefactor, and Musk,
as we've seen, seems to be incredibly influential and
active in the new Trump government. Um, AND indeed
the, the neo-reactionary ideas of Curtis Yarvin, which I've
mentioned, in particular, these appear as essentially the intellectual
backbone for a kind of strain within the American
government right now. So it is not pure transhumanism,
of course. Um, I would say it's a kind
of almost a cancerous offshoot, uh, but it's taken
its place right at the center of global power,
which is another reason I think it's incredibly important
to understand what transhumanism is. I think also um
another kind of interesting political poll that might be
worth mentioning uh comes from a thinker I mentioned
earlier, FM 2030. So, um, in 1973 he published
a book called Upingers, a Futurist Manifesto, and in
it he claims that the traditional politics of right
and left are all down politics because they're all
concerned with limitation. Um, BUT, you know, transhumanism and,
and this kind of the transcendent possibilities of the
upwing means that we will, we will just progress
beyond ethical con contestations, we'll progress beyond the right
and left. Again, this false assumption that technological progress
solves all ethical contestation. And building on Esfandieri's notion,
FM 2030's notion, um, some transhumanists called Steve Fuller
and Monica Lipinska, they later claim in their book
The Pro-actionary imperative that that up down politics are
are they're kind of the new political polls for
the future really, uh, with Up being transhumanist and,
and, and pro-actionary and. Techno utopian and down being
posthumanist and precautionary and environmentally minded. So, so there's
a, a kind of, you know, a version of,
of a new political polarity where transhumanism is seen
as the upwing and kind of environmentalism, etc. IS
seen as as the down.
So tell us now about this term, which I
think was coined by Emil Porres task realism, which
is, I think we could say a collection of
different kinds of ideology. Some of them we've already
talked about. It includes Transhumanism, extropianism, singularitarianism, cosmism, rationalism,
effective altruism, and long-termism. I mean, tell us about
the term why and why do all of these
different kinds of ideologies go together here.
Yeah, OK, good, good question. So, so Tesreel is
essentially, it's an acronym that was invented, as you
say, by uh Emil P. Torres and and Tim
Gebru. And as I understand it, it came from
a conversation between them where Emil was, was, he
was trying to describe the kind of the lineage
of transhumanist philosophies which had led to a current
obsession with artificial general intelligence in the AI industry.
And whenever he was, you know, referring to, he
would talk about, oh well, this person who was
an extropian, and it would just get very, very
confusing, so he kind of, you know, uh sorry,
they, they coined this, this concept of tests reel.
So the list, as you say, it starts with
transhumanism, and here they're referring to Julian Huxley's notion
and identifying, um, you know, his connection with eugenics
actually, which they write about a lot as well.
Um, NEXT emerged extropianism, which I've mentioned, that's the
movement in the 80s and 90s, uh, really the
start of the modern transhumanist movement, very libertarian, fairly
juvenile philosophy and truth, um, complete obsession with, with
Ayn Rand and and Hayek, etc. After that, you
get singularitarianism, that's mainly inspired by Ray Kurzweil. It's
the idea that humans will merge with technologies and
super intelligence will kind of bring about a kind
of event horizon where we can't even imagine what's
on the other side of that of that event
horizon. Then there's cosmism, which is not a Russian
cosmism, which some people have cited it as Russian
cosmism, that's a different philosophy. Uh, THIS is um
uh cosmism, it's um. Uh, IT'S particularly associated with
a transhumanist thinker called Ben Goetzel, and he's key
to popularizing the term artificial general intelligence. Um, THEN
after that you get rationalism, that's mainly related to
the less wrong wiki and the work of Eliezer
Yudkovsky. Uh, WHO again also, by the way, uh,
you know, he was part of the Estroian mailing
list back in the day. So again, these are
all, these people are all connected and have been
for decades. Um, AND then you get effective altruism,
which I've mentioned, which is this utilitarian rationalist approach
to morality, and it's got a. Huge overlap with
the rationalist community, same kind of group of people
essentially. And finally, long-termism, which, as I said, is
a, is a kind of fusing of transhumanism and
effective altruism, a kind of short circuit to the
movement which makes transhumanism the ultimate form of moral
good in the universe. Now, essentially what Emil and
Teamn are trying to uh kind of signal or
or suggest um with this term is, well, firstly,
it's the historical links to eugenics, which they see
manifest all over the current AI industry. Um, THERE'S
also, uh, the point that there's an incredible amount
of overlap and through line of the characters involved
in these movements, especially from Extropianism onwards. So Bostrom,
Yudkovsky, Moore, they're all there on the original Extropian
mailing lists. Goetzel too is a long-term transhumanist. They
have been members of the same organizations and going
to the same conferences for years, so all these
people are, you know, a small little clique that
are interconnected, um. And whilst the ideas of transhumanism
have always been maybe a little bit niche, a
little bit crackpot on the edges, uh, you know,
suddenly big tech is the most hegemonic sector of
the economy and its leaders are the richest people
in the world. And that, that whole industry and
in particular the AI part of it, are absolutely
steeped in the mythology. Of these ideologies. So it's
the water they swim in, it's the air they
breathe. If you want to understand the most powerful
forces on planet Earth right now, you can't do
it without understanding the influence of this this strain
of transhumanist philosophies. It's why OpenAI's stated aim is
to build artificial general intelligence, for example. So that's
what Tere was it was a temp. Thing to
do, um, Emil is kind of quite keen to
point out that you can be a transhumanist without
being a test realist, uh, which might seem like
a contradiction in terms, but this test realal notion
is, is kind of, it, it both points to
a historical through line, though, those, those names kind
of follow an order, so that's the historical order
in which they emerged. Um, AND also. Um, uh,
YOU know, the, the, it, it, it's the, it's
the form of those, uh, philosophies that, that kind
of influence the AI industry and, and, um, it
kind of create this obsession with artificial general intelligence
in particular. So, uh, so yeah, it's that, that
particular type of of transhumanist mindset which they're drawing
attention to.
Mhm. But since you can be a transhumanist, a
transhumanist and not a task realist, and at a
certain point there you mentioned the link that Emil
Pitter is establishes between task realism and the eugenics.
Is there also a link between transhumanism and eugenics?
Uh, YES, um, I, I think there is, um,
so. Well, for one thing, I think I mentioned
earlier that um er Julian Huxley is, is often
identified as, as the kind of progenitor of, of
transhumanist ideology. And um Julian Huxley was a member
of the Eugenics Society, for example. So, so that's
one very obvious link between transhumanism and and eugenics.
Um, SOME transhumanists even just embrace the term eugenics.
They, they say, yep, that's what we are, it's
great. Others play it down. Um, SO some, uh,
again, they point to morphological freedom to differentiate their
form of eugenics to state sponsored forms of eugenics
of the past, such as Nazism. Um, uh, YEAH,
I mean, Tim Neat and Emil have been doing
some great work on the links between transhumanist ideologies
and eugenics. Um, I think what is particularly worrying
at the moment is that there is a kind
of fusion again of transhumanism with a bunch of
other political ideologies on the right, including overtly racist
ideas that advocate deeply troubling forms of eugenics and
conceptions of natural human hierarchies. Um, SO, you know,
I think forms of transhumanism that engage with this
kind of thinking are. REALLY problematic, utterly abhorrent in
truth, and, and I would say a clear and
present danger to society. We, we absolutely need to
contest and reject those ideas. Um, I think the
work of Quinlibodian is very useful for understanding how
the history of neoliberalism actually underpins this trend. His
new book, Hae Bastards, explores this, um, this relationship
between this kind of, um, eugenic ideas, uh, human,
natural human hierarchy and, and, uh, and kind of
the, you know, how it emerged out of, out
of, um, neoliberalism, uh, so it's, which is absolutely
worth um worth investigating. So yeah, I think, you
know, transhumanism has a strong link to eugenics, ultimately
eugenics is how do we make better people. Transhumanism
is the same project, um, so yeah, strong links
there.
What is it that in your book you call
data totalitarianism and what part is played by things
like surveillance, uh, the idea of the quantified self,
algorithms, personal data, and, and these other things that,
uh, well, I mean, what kind of role do
they play in data totalitarianism?
Yeah, OK, so, um, a, a, a, a big
desire of transhumanists is essentially to make the world
tractable to human will. Um, SO the, the mathematician
John van Neumann, for example, he said, uh, all
stable processes we shall predict, all unstable processes we
shall control. And that sentence has proved a very
powerful inspiration to the transhumanist ideology. Um, MAYBE we
can talk a bit more later on about the
kind of cybernetic influence on transhumanism, but essentially, if
the world with all its complexity can be simplified
or abstracted into something we can control, then transhumanist
fantasies are, are boosted, um. So you could think
of this as a, as a um as a
kind of dataism. You could use the term deism.
I think Yuval No Harari calls it a kind
of new religion of deism. Essentially it's the belief
that big data and AI uh will allow us
to predict and control everything. And of course big
data is now absolutely central to the new capitalist
structures as well. To the extent that, that, you
know, theorists have suggested we're we're entering a new
form of capitalism. So for Shoshana Zubov, it's, it's
surveillance capitalism. um OR, you know, for Yanis Varoufakis,
we've we've now actually gone beyond capitalism and entered
techno feudalism. Um, SO again, transhumanism and, and capitalism,
they align here, uh, and, and indeed many transhumanists
advocate extensive surveillance systems, which of course would provide
the data to enable all of this. So the
urge towards, you know, algorithmic control essentially, uh, comes
from the idea that, well, humans in this, in
this system are perceived as knowledge objects, essentially in,
in the tradition of radical behaviorism. So that, you
know, we're trying to understand this as a as
an object, a system that we can predict and
control. Um, AND, uh, just, uh, so what, what
you need is information that allow that allows us
to analyze, you know, predict even direct human behavior,
and big data is, is supposedly enabling us to
do this. And of course you would think that
that would leave transhumanists fearing for human agency and,
you know, realizing their beloved morphological freedom can't survive
this process. But instead they actually embrace it because
without, you know, this fantasy of big data and
AI um we we simply won't be able to
control everything, which is essentially their, their aim. So
we have a, a kind of potent reconstruction of
social reality premised on a small subset of humanity
having privileged information. And powerful knowledge over the rest
of humanity, you know, and that's kind of there
in surveillance capitalism, techno feudalism and in transhumanist statism.
So, so the desire within transhumanism to control all
unstable processes, uh, and to transcend all confining qualities
requires a world that is limited its in its
complexity, um. So the entirety is tractable to human
reason and will, and it is, for me it's
that totality which I call data totalitarianism. It's a
kind of extension of surveillance capitalism, an extension of
what Ulysses Mejias and Nick Cory called data colonialism.
Um, YOU know, again, Varoufakis, techno feudalism, it's an
extension of that. It's a, it's a, a kind
of coming together of that capitalist trajectory of data
colonialism, surveillance capitalism with this transhumanist idea, this dream
of controlling everything, meaning everything needs to become um
data that we can then just manipulate to our
own desires. Um, SO I use the concept in
my book as a way to undermine that transhumanist
value I mentioned earlier of the continuous questioning of
knowledge, because it's based on, on the reverence essentially
of instrumentalist forms of knowledge production aimed at ever
increasing potency of, of means geared towards um even
more problematic ends in the form of essentially control,
profit and power. Um, SO that's, that's kind of
what I was trying to get at with this
term, data totalitarianism.
So you mentioned briefly the influence of cybernetics, cybernetics
over transhumanism. So let's talk a little bit more
about that, particularly how, how cybernetic framing of the
mind influences the way that transhumanists think about the
human mind and the potential consequences of that.
Yeah, so, so I, I think it is, it
is cybernetics that enables transhumanists to conceive of life
as just information processing. So that includes minds and
everything else. Everything can be abstracted from its actual
material instantiation and converted to a code which uh
which kind of stands in for it. And that
potentially enables any form of being to exist in
a different instantiation or sub-state and for us to
edit and control it. Um, SO for example, we
can imagine decoding our conscious mind and turning it
into code and uploading that into a virtual system.
So. Essentially this, this creates a kind of um
a material information hierarchy. Information is more pliable than
material reality, so we just have to learn to
speak the code of life. Uh, DNA for example,
can be seen as the code of life. We
can edit it, copy it, make it a new.
Information is conceptualized as potentially separate from the material
world. Um, SO, and, and, and as a result,
intelligence becomes this magical force that allows us to
process information more effectively. Um, ALL of life becomes
just a question of increasingly potent intelligence controlling information
processes. Um, SO, you know, transhumanist discourse is absolutely
full of language which expresses humans in machineic terms
or, or like computers. So humans, for example, are
suboptimal systems or bug ridden code, right? So these,
these metaphors, they're appealing to transhumanist because if humans
are just code, we can be upgraded and fixed,
um, the, the, you know, and the world as
well with all its limitations can be expanded as
well. We can have limitless resources and time. We
just need to write the code, rewrite the code.
So by making things quantifiable and readable, complex interrelational
aspects of reality which defy reductionism are simply removed
from consideration. And, and that, you know, but, but
also along with that, that goes, um, the kind
of it means that questions of meaning disappear too.
Everything is just intelligence and information processing in an
abstract sense. So even human being becomes something that
can be fused with or transferred over to the
digital realm. Um, YOU know, so we no longer
can say what what being human is in the.
Existential or philosophical or ethical sense. Those questions no
longer have meaning for transhumanists, you know, the human
is simply copyable, changeable, replicable, controllable, and potentially immortal.
Um, BUT of course, the material world, in reality,
does not just, uh, disappear. Life is not just
code, and you can't escape ethicality and questions of
meaning. By pretending everything is just like a computer
and the implications of doing so are very dangerous,
but, but that is the kind of cybernetic influence
on, on transhumanism, the fantasy that um life is
just information and we can process it however we
will by increasing our intelligence. You know, intelligence becomes
the cardinal virtue, I guess, of, of um. Of
that kind of thinking.
Mhm. So let me ask you just one question
about artificial intelligence. You've already alluded to it, particularly
AGI or artificial general intelligence several times during our
conversation. But uh how does it tie to transhumanism
and what are the expectations and claims made about
it by accelerationists and transhumanists?
Um, YEAH, I mean, I think I've, I've touched
on this a bit, like you said, I mean,
AI, I think is fundamental to transhumanism. They, they
think of it as a form of magic. Um,
YOU'LL hear them saying things like we're making Sam
think, um, and they talk of alchemy and stuff
like that. So they, they don't all agree on.
Whether, you know, super intelligence or artificial general intelligence
is a threat to human existence, they don't even
even agree whether that matters or not. So some,
some of them would like to see humans replaced
by what they call mind children, which is digital
artificial intelligences, essentially. So um. Yeah, so, uh, you
know, intelligence is, is, as I say, it's the
kind of the cardinal virtue of, of up politics,
because if life is just information processing, then intelligence
is what enables us to order information more effectively.
So that's why AI is so important to transhumanism.
So, um, but. You know, it's worth pointing out
that artificial intelligence is a very narrowly conceived conception
of intelligence, really, right? Um, YOU know, it's, it's
abstracted out of embodied being and situated context and
into machines and made subject potentially to exponential growth.
So this is the magic, the, the kind of
the explosion, the trick, the possibility, um, which kind
of goes beyond the imagination, so it leads to
the singularity, the event horizon and the black hole
behind it which we simply cannot know. um, SO.
You know, to some transhumanists, it is effectively God,
uh, you know, and, and they, they lean on,
on AGI as the thing that will solve all
problems, including all ethical problems. Um, SO yeah, AI
absolutely, it's, it's, it's key to transhumanist ideas, um,
and, and it underpins their fantasies, and likewise transhumanism
has become key to the AI industry and, and
the kind of the moral underpinning of, of what
they're doing, including risking. Um, YOU know, potentially causing
existential risks for humanity.
There is also the term posthumanism. Is it the
same as transhumanism? And if not, what does it
mean and what would be the differences here?
Um, YEAH, OK, good question. So, so, um, posthumanism
is, it's what comes after humanism. So it is,
it's the rejection of certain enlightenment humanist assumptions, essentially.
So unlike transhumanism, which is really about the human
becoming something else, posthumanism is is about humanism, not,
not the human, if you see what I mean.
So, um, they, they do have certain things in
common, so posthumanists agree with transhumanists that the human
condition is fundamentally changeable. Um, AND, and both posthumanist
and transhumanists are very interested in this process of
technogenesis, this dynamic co-evolution of technological and human development.
Um, BUT posthumanists undermine the Enlightenment notion of the
human. So, so they, they, you know, don't accept
the idea that we're all individuals, separate from nature,
with a glistening and powerful rationality that places us
hierarchy. ABOVE the rest of nature. Um, Rather, they
argue, um, that that is a, is a construct,
essentially, it's a, you know, a historically contingent construct,
uh, uh, so it's not what the human is,
it's what we imagined it to be, um, through
Enlightenment humanism. Instead, they would say what humans actually
are, uh, is inextricably embedded in the natural world
around them. Uh WE'RE defined by our relationality, we
can't escape it, so we are just part of
the web of nature, if you like. Um, SO
posthumanism for that reason, aims to think ethically beyond
the human. So they, they emphasize responsibility towards the
wider nature of which we're just a part. So,
um, Rosie Briotti, who's a a famous posthumanist thinker,
she sees, she says that we are bonded by
the compassionate acknowledgement of our interdependence with multiple human
and non-human others. So it's, it's very much a
relational, compassionate kind of um ideology. So whereas transhumanism,
you know, maybe you could characterize that as a
will to power, control, domination, even colonization of the,
of the human and space, the escape of all
earthly limits. Posthumanism emphasizes our embeddedness in nature, it
emphasizes compassion and that we look beyond ourselves. It's
a kind of ecological thinking, not just in the
environmental sense, but also in, in, in terms of
the intraconnection of all things. It therefore embraces complexity
theory, complexity science. And calls for humility, uh, because
we cannot possibly understand all that, that there is.
Complexity science tells us to understand anything completely, we'd
have to understand absolutely everything else, and that was
obviously impossible. So, so it embraces a kind of
humility, the limitation of human reason. Whereas transhumanism tries
to limit complexity and make life tractable to human
will, so it's fundamentally hubristic, you know, it's they're,
they're kind of opposites in that regard. Which is
why, again, when we talked about political polls, there's
this claim. That you could see posthumanism and transhumanism
as kind of um uh transhumanism as up, posthumanism
is down, political polls uh against each other in,
in this new um political imaginary, essentially.
Can there also be religious undertones to transhumanism? I
mean, obviously earlier when I asked you about AGI
you mentioned that some people in among the transhumanists
even think about it or talk about it as
gods, so that's already pointing to religious undertones there,
but more generally can transhumanism be a religious movement
in any way?
Yeah, I mean, absolutely. So I think there are
many dimensions to this. I mean, one thing I've,
I've already mentioned, I think is that there are
actually religious transhumanist organizations, so that's one thing, you
know, there is the Christian Transhumanist Association, etc. um
BUT I think more importantly, transhumanism, it can be
seen as as a kind of secular religion. Um,
IT promises in many ways the same things that
traditional religions have, but, but, you know, it's grounded
in secular science. Um, SO the most transcendent versions
of transhumanism, where, you know, consciousness or maybe just
intelligence kind of leaves the body and exists in
some kind of virtual manifestation, that's just an updated
version of the soul, right? I mean, that's, that's
what it is, um. Uh, YOU know, I, I,
I think, uh, there's two thinkers that have written
quite well on this in particular, Beth Singler and
Megan O'Gieblin. I think, I'm not sure I'm pronouncing
that right, but those two have written a lot
about AI and and transhumanism and its links to
religion. Um, AND, and, you know, I think, um,
Megan points out the great irony is that science
is it's supposed to replace religious fantasy during the
Enlightenment. Um, AND this is what transhumanism celebrates, but
transhumanism then comes along and restores these fantasies and
calls it science, right? So, um, you know, it
can't make these promises without slipping back into those
religious myths, uh, from which science was supposed to
liberate us. Um, Beth Singler also draws attention to
kind of, uh, patterns of religiosity, especially in AI
discourse. She, she points out, for example, the singularity
is, is a godlike, uh, kind of infinite knowledge,
you know, so it's like, uh, the oracle, it's,
it's godlike. Um, AND also it's coming about is
sometimes seen as the rapture or the end of
days. There's an apocalyptic element to it as well,
you know, it, it's an existential, existentially risky thing,
so we're all going to be judged by it,
essentially. Um MIND uploading, of course, is can be
seen as escaping the flesh. Of the mortal world.
Um, uh, Bessinger also points out Rocco's basilisk. I
don't know if you know that, that kind of
thought experiment, but it's, it's an updated version of
Pascal's wager, essentially. So AI threatens eternal damnation for
non-believers, as well as heavenly promises of, of immortality
for, you know, it's apostles, etc. um. You've also
got profits in the form of people like Kurzweil
and Altmann and Musk, although Musk has got to
be the most bizarre profit there's ever been. But,
but, you know, uh, what Kurtzweil promises in particular
is a kind of a technological and universal heaven.
You know, by the end of this century, he
thinks that human consciousness will essentially be bodyless and
we'll be able to travel around the universe taking
on. Uh, ANY physical manifestations in the form of,
of nanobot swarms. So effectively he, he's using religious
fantasy as a kind of rhetorical device, um, promising
the spiritual and and material benefits of religious salvation,
but in a transhumanist discourse, you know, which again
is it has that irony of um uh retreating
back into the religious myth that science is supposed
to free us from. So yeah, I think that's
some of the things we can say about religion.
Do you think that the transhumanism can lead to
dehumanization? If so, what kind of dehumanization would we
be talking about here and what does dehumanization mean
in this particular context?
Um, YEAH, OK, so, as I've mentioned, transhumanists tend
to have a kind of narrow conception of intelligence.
Um, SO they see it as the ability to
solve complex goals. And when you frame it that
way, it avoids questions of context, questions of meaning
and purpose of life, it avoids deeper ethical questions
about our relations with each other and the rest
of nature, you know, which can be seen to
have um dimensions of emotional intelligence or whatever else
linked to them, which we just exclude from, from
these questions. um. So that narrow vision, what it
enables is a very quantifying and kind of hierarchical
notion of intelligence, um, uh, you know, and, and
therefore humans are, are also hierarchically graded, uh, based
on their intelligence, so for example. Um, AND, and,
you know, as I've mentioned, many transhumanists, they often
point out that AI will soon automate most jobs
away, um, leaving no purpose for most humans, uh,
uh, certainly those that don't own the machines, um,
which will of course replace them. Um, AND with
our lack of intelligence, we won't be able to
compete. So they ask, well, what do we do
with the, with the people in, in this context?
And um, Elise Bohan, who's another transhumanist, she argues
that, you know, things like universal basic income are
not acceptable because, as she points out, almost half
the human population has an IQ below 100, so
she says, you know, they just can't be trusted
to decide what to do with their own lives.
So, so her solution for this problem is not,
it's not wealth redistribution, it's not universal public services,
it's not that fully automated luxury communism, none of
that. Instead, it's, it's an updated version of the
happiness producing drug from Brave New World, Soma. So
we end up back with the Huxleys actually. Um,
SO she stays. THAT kind of, uh, she says
that low status, low skilled, low IQ and unemployed
people have the weakest buy-in for reality, so we
need better drugs and better virtual worlds. So, um,
you know, essentially she's arguing that in the 21st
century it would be necessary for humans to spend
more time in virtual reality. And, and actually this
is an exact copy of uh the neo reactionary
thinker Curtis Yarvin. Uh HE states that virtualizing the
masses is mildly preferable to the profit maximizing solution
of converting them all into biodiesel. So, so in
transhumanism, there's, there's these questions of what do we
do with humans that no longer have much purpose
for us essentially. Um, AND, and, you know, as
a result, you can argue that transhumanism can be
seen to have a concerning proximity to necropoli politics,
the indifference to death and dying of those structured
outside of the technocapitalist bubble of progress. And in
fact, the the the transhumanist thinker Steve Fuller, who
I mentioned earlier, he calls for the construction of
a new republic of humanity, he calls it. And
um that would be exclusively for entities that should
be regarded as having political rights. And for Fuller,
humans can be in this, but so can animals
and so can machines. All of them can gain
entry and all of them can be expelled. And
what he states is that it's it's, it's your
capacity for for self assertion against a countervailing force
um that marks you as worthy for rights. You
don't simply capitulate or adapt, you leave your mark.
So for him, any entity that fails to leave
its mark um should become susceptible to what he
calls necronomics, um, and economics of death making, which
aims to generate the most societal value from death
making. Um, SO in other words, if you are
not at the top of the technohuman hierarchy in
control of our kind of future human evolution or
posthuman evolution, you have no right to an existence
at all. You compete or die. And so it's
a radicalization of the expulsions and concentrations that we've
seen are inherent to capitalist logics, you know, um.
And you know, some transhumanists acknowledge the, the many
crises of our times and um but they always
tend to locate the failings in human biology instead
of structural, social injustice, frankly. So, um again, Elise
Bohan calls us eight-brained meat sacks, and you know,
we're, we're ill fitted to the modern world, in
other words. Um, SO, you know, the, these ideas,
this doesn't feel like a kind of participatory, democratic,
inclusive, pluralistic project, because most of us are considered
just too stupid to be trusted with the human
future. Instead, it's a kind of like a hyper
rationalist ordering, uh, with techno solutionism, kind of IQ
fetishism, uh, and, and, you know, as we've mentioned
a a problematic eugenics essentially kind of those logics
are baked into this. Um, SO, you know, I
think transhumanism, it, it, it too often it, it
functions as a kind of, uh, a disorienting discourse.
It, it stops us thinking ethically. It celebrates the,
the amassing of, of knowledge and power, um, but
doesn't enable us to think hard about what, what
the techno human evolutionary implications are. Um, IT, it
kind of, yeah, it tends towards the abstracted, uh,
the utopian and the hyperbolic, you know, um, uh,
but it relies on things like super intelligence to
kind of realize ethical outcomes or, or a benevolent
form of, of eugenics, as Elise Bohane would put
it. Um, SO it constantly displays this false belief
that, again, I've spoken of earlier, that scientific progress
necessarily leads to ethical progress. And er you know,
it's that failing that opens transhumanist aims to charges
of, I think, dehumanization. The failure to ensure an
inclusive future for for humans and non-humans who share
this planet.
Finally, then, uh, how should we as a society
deal with all of this? I mean, what can
we do with all this information about transhumanism and
the other related movements and how should we approach
ethically a potential transhuman future?
Um, YEAH, I mean, that, that question is huge.
I think it's, it's probably too, too big to
deal with at the end of like, um, uh,
you know, uh, an hour and a bit podcast.
But, um, to even begin, I think, to do
justice to that, we probably need another, another couple
of hours. But, but I think, um, in the
short term, you know, what we absolutely need is,
is, uh, global resistance to tech authoritarianism and all
forms of fascism, and a rejection of, of this
kind of um. Uh, ESSENTIALIST concept of, of human
hierarchy and um the rejection of the, uh, the
worth of all of, of all people. Um. In,
in my book, I, I develop a kind of
meta-ethical framework for the future, which I call virtual
relational anthropoporea. But that's a probably a story for
a different day. It's a bit, bit much to
unpack right now. But the book is open access,
and it's free to download or read online for
anyone who might be interested, so they can go
and check it out there. But essentially, you know,
it, what it does is it calls for systemic
alternatives to kind of technocapitalism. Aimed at doing uh
less harm primarily, um, and more cautiously and lightly
directing, uh, kind of our capacities, with a focus
on leaving space for pluralistic ways of, of both
human and non-human being. So that is not an,
uh, an outright rejection of technological development in all
its forms. I'm not calling for attempting to halt
technohuman evolution. Um, I, you know, as I've said,
I think we've always evolved alongside our technologies and,
and we'll obviously continue to do that. But we
do need a reassertion of values. Um, SO I
think philosophy, the humanities, and the arts, as well
as kind of non-Western perspectives of human meaning, need
to play a much more pivotal role, I think,
in our culture. Um, WHICH would allow us to,
to challenge the, the kind of the dominance, the
pervasive power, and the corrupting force of the drive
of a few Silicon Valley billionaires to accumulate endless
capital and, and to essentially escape with the spoils
of this technological development, uh, whilst rejecting responsibility for
the, the kind of social and environmental wreckage that
they're leaving behind. So, so that's what I think
we need to think about. Big challenge for, for,
for us, and, and I think it should be
the starting point of any serious transhumanist kind of
um thought really, but it obviously isn't.
Yes, let's end on that note, and for people
who would like to learn more about your meta
ethical approach that you live at the end of
the book, they can read it on, or they
can search for it online and it's again the
politics and ethics of transhumanism, techno human evolution, and
advanced capitalism. I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview and Doctor Thomas, apart
from the book, would you like to tell people
where they can find your work on the internet?
Yeah, sure. So, um, I'm on Blue Sky, um,
uh, uh, also I've got a website, Posthuman Futures.com.
And, uh, I've actually got my own podcast that
I, I, I'm, I'm nowhere near as, uh, as
regular as you, I'm afraid, Ricardo, nowhere near as
prolific, but there's a, a little podcast called the
A to Z of the Future, which has a
little series on the Anthropocene, a little series on
transhumanism where I interview a lot of the, the,
uh, the, the transhumanists I've mentioned today, uh, so
you can check out that as well. And I'm,
yeah, that that's good.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
very fun and informative conversation. Thank you. Thanks
a lot, Ricardo. Take care. Cheers.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mater Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant John Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
Fran David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londonorea. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynalebaa
medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
the Acosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray,
Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursulauddinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbo, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal N Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.